[Chapter] 5: An Analysis of the “Irreductible Elements” (dhātus) (the elements)1. Space does
not exist at all before the defining characteristic of space (ākāśalakṣaṇa).If it would exist
before the defining characteristic, then one must falsely conclude that there would be
something without a defining characteristic.

2. In no case has anything existed without a defining characteristic.If an entity without a
defining characteristic does not exist, to what does the defining characteristic apply?

3. There is no functioning of a defining characteristic in a case where there is [already] a
defining characteristic or where there is not a defining characteristic.And it can function
in nothing except where there is a defining characteristic or where there is not a defining
characteristic.

4. When there is no related function (saṃpravṛtti) (i.e. defining process), it is not possible
to have “that to which a defining characteristic applies.”And if “that to which a defining
characteristic applies” is not possible, then a defining characteristic cannot come into
existence.

5. Therefore, “that to which a defining characteristic applies” does not exist (i.e independently);
and certainly a defining characteristic itself does not exist (i.e independently).Now,
something does not exist without “that to which a defining characteristic applies” and
the defining characteristic.

6. If the existing thing (1) (bhāva) does not exist, how then would the non-existing thing (2)
(abhāva) come into existence?And who holds: the existing-and-non-existing (3) thing which
does not have the properties of an existing-and-non-existing thing (4)?

7. Therefore space is neither an existing thing nor a non-existing thing, neither something
to which a defining characteristic applies (i.e. separate from a defining characteristic)
nor a defining characteristic. (i.e. the same as a defining characteristic)Also, the other
five irreducible elements can be considered in the same way as space.

8. But those unenlightened people who either affirm reality or non-realityDo not perceive the
blessed cessation-of-appearance of existing things.

