[Chapter] 7: An Analysis of Composite Products (saṃskṛta) (origination, duration, and decay)1.
If origination (utpāda) is a composite product, then the three characteristics [of existence:
“origination,” “duration,” and “dissolution”] are appropriate.But if origination is
a non-composite (asaṃskṛta), then how [could there be] characteristics of a composite product?

2. When the three are separate, origination of either of the other two characteristics does
not suffice to function as a characteristic.If united in a composite product, how could they
all be at one place at one time?

3. If origination, duration, and dissolution are other [secondary] characteristics of composite
products,It is an infinite regress. If this is not so, they are not composite products.

4. The “originating origination” (utpādotpāda) (i.e. the beginning of the origination) is only
the origination of the basic origination (mūlotpāda) (i.e. the beginning of the product);Also
the origination of the basic [origination] (i.e. the beginning of the beginning of
the product) produces the “originating origination.” (i.e. the beginning of the origination)

5. But if, according to you, the originating origination (i.e. self-originating origination)
produces basic origination, (i.e. also causes the beginning of the product)How, according
to you, will this [originating origination] (i.e. self-originating origination) produce that
[basic origination] (i.e. the beginning of the product) if [it itself] is not produced
by basic origination (i.e. the beginning of the product)?

6. If, according to you, that which has originated through basic [origination] (i.e. referring
to the dependent originating origination) produces basic [origination], (i.e. like affirming
that the effect exist before the cause)How does the basic [origination], which is yet
unproduced by that [originating origination] (i.e. self-originating origination), cause
that [originating origination] (i.e. self-originating origination) to be originated?

7. According to you, this, while originating, would certainly cause that to originate—If this,
not being produced, would be able to cause origination.

8. [The opponent claim:]As a light is the illuminator of both itself and that which is other
than itself,So origination would originate both itself and that which is other than itself.

9. [Nagarjuna answers:]There is no darkness in the light and there where the light is placed.What
could the light illumine? Indeed illumination is the getting rid of darkness.

10. How is darkness destroyed by the light being originated,When the light, being originated,
does not come in contact with darkness?

11. But then, if darkness is destroyed by a light having no contact with [darkness],[A light]
placed here will destroy the darkness of the entire world.

12. If the light illuminated both itself and that which is other than itself,Then, without a
doubt, darkness will cover both itself and that which is other than itself.

13. If it has not yet originated, how does origination produce itself?And if it has already
originated, when it is being produced, what is produced after that which is already produced?

14. In no way does anything originate by what is being originated (ii), by what is already originated
(iii), or by what is not yet originated (i)—Just as it has been said in [the analysis
of] “presently going to (ii),” “that which is already gone to (i)” and “that which is
not yet gone to (iii).”

15. When, in that-which-is-originated (iii), there is nothing which activates that which is
being originated (ii),How can one say: That which is being originated (ii) [exists] presupposing
that which is produced?

16. Whatever comes into existence presupposing something else is without self-existence (svabhāva).[As
there is] an allayment of “being originated,” so [also] of that which is originated
(iii).

17. If some particular thing which is not yet originated (i) is indeed known to exist,That thing
will be originated. What originates if it does not exist?

18. And if the origination originates that which is being originated (ii),What origination,
in turn, would originate that origination? (i.e. infinite regress)

19. If another origination originates that [origination], there will be an infinite regress
of originations.But if non-origination is that which is origination, then everything [without
qualification] would originate.

20. It is not possible that what has originated either exists or does not exist,Nor that what
has not originated either exists or does not exist; this has been demonstrated earlier.

21. The origination of something being destroyed is not possible;And whatever is not being destroyed,
that entity is not possible.

22. Neither an “entity that has endured (iii)” (sthitabhāva) nor an “entity that has not endured
(i)” endures;Not even something enduring (ii) endures. And what endures if it is not
originated?

23. Duration is not possible of a thing that is being destroyed.But whatever is not being destroyed,
that thing (bhāva) is [also] not possible.

24. Because every entity always [remains in] the law of old age and death,What entities are
there which endure without old age and death?

25. The enduring quality of a different duration is as impossible as of that same duration,So
the origination of origination is neither itself nor that which is other than itself.

26. “That which has ceased (iii)” (niruddha) does not cease; and “that which has not ceased
(i)” does not cease;Nor even “that which is ceasing (ii).” For, what can cease [if it is]
produced? (i.e. or if it is not really produced?)

27. Therefore cessation of an enduring entity is not possible.Moreover, cessation of a non-enduring
entity is not possible.

28. Indeed, a state [of existence] does not cease because of this state;And a different state
[of existence] does not cease because of a different state.

29. So, if the production of all dharmas is not possible,Then neither is the cessation of all
(i.e. any?) dharmas possible.

30. Therefore cessation of a real existing entity is not possible;And certainly both an existing
entity and a non-existing entity cannot be possible in the same case.

31. Even more, cessation of a non-real existing entity is not possible.Just as there is no second
decapitation!

32. There is no cessation by means of itself; nor cessation by something other than itself;Just
as there is no origination of origination by itself nor by another.

33. Because the existence of production, duration, and cessation is not proved, there is no
composite product (saṃskṛta);And if a composite product is not proved, how can a non-composite
product (asaṃskṛta) be proved?

34. As a magic trick, a dream or a fairy castle.Just so should we consider origination, duration,
and cessation.

