[Chapter] 15: An Analysis of a Self-existent Thing (svabhava) (being and non-being)1. The production
of a self-existent thing by a conditioning cause is not possible,[For,] being produced
through dependence on a cause, a self-existent thing would be “something which is produced”
(krtaka).

2. How, indeed, will a self-existent thing become “something which is produced”?Certainly, a
self-existent thing [by definition] is “not-produced” and is independent of anything else.

3. If there is an absence of a self-existent thing, how will an other-existent thing (parabhava)
come into being?Certainly the self-existence of an other-existent thing is called ”other-existence.”

4. Further, how can a thing [exist] without either self-existence or other-existence?If either
self-existence or other existence exist, then an existing thing, indeed, would be proved.

5. If there is no proof of an existent thing, then a non-existent thing cannot be proved.Since
people call the other-existence of an existent thing a “non-existent thing.”

6. Those who perceive self-existence and other-existence, and an existent thing and a non-existent
thing,Do not perceive the true nature of the Buddha’s teaching.

7. In “The Instruction of Katyayana” both “it is” and “it is not” are opposedBy the Glorious
One, who has ascertained the meaning of “existent” and non-existent.”

8. If there would be an existent thing by its own nature, there could not be “non-existence’
of that [thing].Certainly an existent thing different from its own nature would never obtain.

9. [An opponent asks:] If there is no basic self-nature (prakti), of what will there be “otherness”?[Nagarjuna
answers:] If there is basic self-nature, of what will there be “otherness”?

10. “It is” is a notion of eternity. “It is not” is a nihilistic view.Therefore, one who is
wise does not have recourse to “being” or “non-being.”

11. That which exists by its own nature is eternal since “it does not not-exist.”If it is maintained:
“That which existed before does not exist now,” there annihilation would logically
follow.

