[Chapter] 18: An Analysis of the Individual Self (ātma) (the self and phenomena)1. If the individual
self (ātma) were [identical to] the “groups” (skandha), then it would partake of
origination and destruction.If [the individual self] were different from the “groups,” then
it would be without the characteristics of the “groups.”

2. If the individual self does not exist, how then will there be something which is “my own”?There
is lack of possessiveness and no ego on account of the cessation of self and that which
is “my own.”

3. He who is without possessiveness and who has no ego — He, also, does not exist.Whoever sees
“he who is without possessiveness” or “he who has no ego” [really] does not see.

4. When “I” and “mine” have stopped, then also there is not an outside nor an inner self.The
“acquiring” [of karma] (upadana) is stopped; on account of that destruction, there is destruction
of verse existence.

5. On account of the destruction of the pains (klesa) of action there is release for pains of
action exist for him who constructs them.These pains result from phenomenal extension (prapanca);
but this phenomenal extension comes to a stop by emptiness.

6. There is the teaching of "individual self" (ātma), and the teaching of "non-individual self"
(anātma);But neither "individual self" nor "non-individual self" whatever has been taught
by the Buddhas.

7. When the domain of thought has been dissipated, “that which can be stated” is dissipated.Those
things which are unoriginated and not terminated, like nirvana, constitute the Truth
(dharmata).

8. Everything is “actual” (tathyam) or “not-actual,” or both “acts actual-and-not-actual,”Or
“neither-actual-nor-not-actual”:This is the teaching of the Buddha.

9. “Not caused by something else,” “peaceful,” “not elaborated by discursive thought,”“Indeterminate,”
“undifferentiated”: such are the characteristics of true reality (tattva).

10. Whatever exists, being dependent [on something else], is certainly not identical to that
[other thing],Nor is a thing different from that; therefore, it is neither destroyed nor
eternal.

11. The immortal essence of the teaching of the Buddhas, the lords of the world, isWithout singleness
or multiplicity; it is not destroyed nor is it eternal.

12. If fully-developed Buddhas do not arise [in the world] and the disciples [of the Buddha]
disappear,Then, independently, the knowledge of the self-produced enlightened ones (pratyekabuddha)
is produced.

