[Chapter] 20: An Analysis of the Aggregate (samagri) of Causes and Conditions (cause and effect)1.
If a product (phala) is produced through the aggregate of causes and conditions,And
exists in an aggregate, how will it be produced in the aggregate?

2. If a product is produced in the aggregate of causes and conditions,And does not exist in
the aggregate, how will it be produced in the aggregate?

3. If the product is in the aggregate of causes and conditions,Would it not be “grasped” [i.e.,
located] in the aggregate? But it is not “grasped” in the aggregate.

4. If the product is not in the aggregate of causes and conditions,Then the causes and conditions
would be the same as non-causes and non-conditions.

5. If a cause, having given the cause for a product, is stopped,Then that which is “given” and
that which is stopped would be two identities of the cause.

6. If a cause without having given the cause for a product is stoppedThen, the cause being stopped,
the product would be produced as something derived from a non-cause (ahetuka).

7. If the product would become visible concomitantly with the aggregate [of causes and conditions],Then
it would logically follow that the producer and that which is produced [exist]
in the same moment.

8. If the product would become visible before the aggregate,Then the product, without being
related to causes and conditions, would be something derived from a non-cause.

9. If, when the cause of the product is stopped, there would be a continuation of the cause,It
would logically follow that there would be another production of the previous producing
cause.

10. How can that which is stopped, i.e., something which has disappeared, produce the arising
of a product?How could a cause which is enclosed by its product, even though it persists,
originate [that product]?

11. Or if that [cause] were not enclosed by the product, which product would it produce?For
the cause does not produce the product, having seen or not having seen [the product].

12. There is no concomitance of a past product with a past cause, a future [cause] or present
[cause].

13. Certainly there is no concomitance of the present product with future cause, past [cause]
or present [cause].

14. Certainly there is no concomitance of a future product with a present cause, future [cause]
or past [cause].

15. If there is no concomitance whatever, how would the cause produce the product?Or if a concomitance
exists, how would the cause produce the product?

16. If the cause is empty of a product, how would it produce the product?If the cause is not
empty of a product, how would it produce the product?

17. A non-empty product would not be originated, [and] a non-empty [product] would not be destroyed.Then
that is non-empty which will not originate or not disappear.

18. How would that be produced which is empty?How would that be destroyed which is empty?It
logically follows, then, that which is empty is not originated and not destroyed.

19. Certainly a oneness of cause and product is not possible at all.Nor is a difference of cause
and product possible at all.

20. If there were a oneness of the cause and product, then there would be an identity of the
originator and what is originated.If there were a difference of product and cause, then a
cause would be the same as that which is not a cause.

21. Can a cause produce a product which is essentially existing in itself (svabhva)?Can a cause
produce a product which is not essentially existing in itself (svabhava)?

22. It is not possible to have “what is by its nature a cause” (hetutva) of “that which is not
producing.”If “what is by its nature a cause” is not possible, whose product will exist?

23. How will that [aggregate of causes and conditions] produce a product whenThat which is the
aggregate of causes and conditions does not produce itself by itself?

24. The product is not produced by the aggregate; nor is the product not produced by the aggregate.Without
the product, how is there an aggregate of conditions?

