[Chapter] 24: An Analysis of the Holy Truths (aryasatya) (the noble truths)1. If everything
is empty, there is no origination nor destruction.Then you must incorrectly conclude that
there is non-existence of the four holy truths.

2. If there is non-existence of the four holy truths, the saving knowledge, the elimination
[of illusion],The “becoming” [enlightened] (bhavana), and the “realization” [of the goal]
are impossible.

3. If there is non-existence, then also the four holy “fruits” do not exist.In the non-existence
of fruit there is no “residing in fruit” nor obtaining.

4. When the community [of Buddhists] does not exist, then those eight “kinds of persons” [i.e.,
four abiding in the fruit and four who are obtaining] do not exist.Because there is non-existence
of the four holy truths, the real dharma does not exist.

5. And if there are no dharma and community, how will the Buddha exist?By speaking thus, [that
everything is empty] certainly you deny the three jewels [i.e., the Buddha, the dharma,
and the community].

6. You deny the real existence of a product, of right and wrong,And all the practical behavior
of the world as being empty.

7. We reply that you do not comprehend the point of emptiness;You eliminate both “emptiness”
itself and its purpose from it.

8. The teaching by the Buddhas of the dharma has recourse to two truths:The world-ensconced
truth (T1) and the truth which is the highest sense (T2).

9. Those who do not know the distribution (vibhagam) of the two kinds of truthDo not know the
profound “point” (tattva) (T3) in the teaching of the Buddha.

10. The highest sense [of the truth] (T2) is not taught apart from practical behavior (T1),And
without having understood the highest sense (T2) one cannot understand nirvana (T3).

11. Emptiness, having been dimly perceived, utterly destroys the slow-witted.It is like a snake
wrongly grasped or [magical] knowledge incorrectly applied.

12. Therefore the mind of the ascetic [Guatama] was diverted from teaching the dharma,Having
thought about the incomprehensibility of the dharma by the stupid.

13. Time and again you have made a condemnation of emptiness,But that refutation does not apply
to our emptiness.

14. When emptiness “works”, then everything in existence “works”. (A)If emptiness “does not
work”, then all existence “does not work”. (B)

15. You, while projecting your own faults on us, (i.e. objectifying emptiness)Are like a person
who, having mounted his horse, forgot the horse!(i.e. a tool)

16. If you recognize real existence on account of the self-existence of things,You perceive
that there are uncaused and unconditioned things.

17. You deny “what is to be produced,” cause, the producer, the instrument of production, and
the producing action,And the origination, destruction, and “fruit.”

18. The “originating dependently” we call “emptiness”;This apprehension, i.e., taking into account
[all other things], is the understanding of the middle way.

19. Since there is no dharma whatever originating independently,No dharma whatever exists which
is not empty.

20. If all existence is not empty, there is neither origination nor destruction.You must wrongly
conclude then that the four holy truths do not exist.

21. Having originated without being conditioned, how will sorrow (dukkha) come into existence?It
is said that sorrow (dukkha) is not eternal; therefore, certainly it does not exist by
its own nature (svabbava).

22. How can that which is existing by its own nature originate again?For him who denies emptiness
there is no production.

23. There is no destruction of sorrow (dukkha) if it exists by its own nature.By trying to establish
“self-existence” you deny destruction.

24. If the path [of release] is self-existent, then there is no way of bringing it into existence
(bhavana);If that path is brought into existence, then “self-existence,” which you claim
does not exist.

25. When sorrow (dukkha), origination, and destruction do not exist,What kind of path will obtain
the destruction of sorrow (dukkha)?

26. If there is no complete knowledge as to self-existence, how [can there be] any knowledge
of it?Indeed, is it not true that self-existence is that which endures?

27. As in the case of complete knowledge, neither destruction, realization, “bringing into existence,”Nor
are the four holy fruits possible for you.

28. If you accept “self-existence,” and a “fruit” is not known by its self-existence,How can
it be known at all?

29. In the non-existence of “fruit,” there is no “residing in fruit” nor obtaining [the “fruit”];When
the community [of Buddhists] does not exist, then those eight “kinds of persons”
do not exist.

30. Because there is non-existence of the four holy truths, the real dharma does not exist.And
if there is no dharma and community, how will the Buddha exist?

31. For you, either the one who is enlightened (buddha) comes into being independent of enlightenment,Or
enlightenment comes into being independent of the one who is enlightened.

32. For you, some one who is a non-buddha by his own nature (svabhava) but strives for enlightenment
(i.e. a Bodhisattva)Will not attain the enlightenment though the “way of life of
becoming fully enlightened.”

33. Neither the dharma nor non-dharma will be done anywhere.What is produced which is non-empty?
Certainly self-existence is not produced.

34. Certainly, for you, there is a product without [the distinction] of dharma or non-dharma.Since,
for you, the product caused by dharma or non-dharma does not exist.

35. If, for you, the product is caused by dharma or non-dharma, be non-empty?How can that product,
being originated by dharma or non-dharma empty?

36. You deny all mundane and customary activitiesWhen you deny emptiness [in the sense of] dependent
co-origination (patytya-samutpada).

37. If you deny emptiness, there would be action which is unactivated.There would be nothing
whatever acted upon, and a producing action would be something not begun.

38. According to [the doctrine of] “self-existence” the world is free from different conditions;Then
it will exist as unproduced, undestroyed and immutable.

39. If non-emptiness does not exist, then something is attained which is not attained;There
is cessation of sorrow (dukkha) and actions, and all evil is destroyed.

40. He who perceives dependent co-origination (patytya-samutpada)Also understands sorrow (dukkha),
origination, and destruction as well as the path [of release].

