[Chapter] 25: An Analysis of Nirvana (nirvana)1. If all existence is empty, there is no origination
nor destruction.Then whose nirvana through elimination [of suffering] and destruction
[of illusion] would be postulated?

2. If all existence is non-empty, there is no origination nor destruction.Then whose nirvana
through elimination [of suffering] and destruction [of illusion] would be postulated?

3. Nirvana has been said to be neither eliminated nor attained, neither annihilated nor eternal,Neither
disappeared nor originated.

4. Nirvana is certainly not an existing thing, for then it would be characterized by old age
and death.In consequence it would involve the error that an existing thing would not become
old and be without death.

5. And if nirvana is an existing thing, nirvana would be a constructed product (samskrta),Since
never ever has an existing thing been found to be a non-constructed-product (asamskrta).

6. But if nirvana is an existing thing, how could [nirvana] exist without dependence [on something
else]?Certainly nirvana does not exist as something without dependence.

7. If nirvana is not an existing thing, will nirvana become a non-existing thing?Wherever there
is no existing thing, neither is there a non-existing thing.

8. But if nirvana is a non-existing thing, how could [nirvana] exist without dependence [on
something else]?Certainly nirvana is not a non-existing thing which exists without dependence.

9. That state which is the rushing in and out [of existence] when dependent or conditioned—This
[state], when not dependent or not conditioned, is seen to be nirvana.

10. The teacher [Gautama] has taught that a “becoming” and a “non-becoming” (vibhava) are destroyed;Therefore
it obtains that: Nirvana is neither an existent thing nor a non-existent
thing.

11. If nirvana were both an existent and a non-existent thing,Final release (moksa) would be
[both] an existent and a non-existent thing; but that is not possible.

12. If nirvana were both an existent and a non-existent thing,There would be no nirvana without
conditions, for these both [operate with] conditions.

13. How can nirvana exist as both an existent thing and a non-existent thing,For nirvana is
a non-composite-product (asamskrta), while both an existent thing and a non-existent thing
are composite products (samskrta).

14. How can nirvana exist as both an existent and a non-existent thing?There is no existence
of both at one and the same place, as in the case of both darkness and light.

15. The assertion: “Nirvana is neither an existent thing nor a non-existent thing”Is proved
if [the assertion]: “It is an existent thing and a non-existent thing” were proved.

16. If nirvana is neither an existent thing nor a non-existent thing,Who can really arrive at
[the assertion]: “neither an existent thing nor a non-existent thing”?

17. It is not expressed if the Glorious One [the Buddha] exists (1) after his death,Or does
not exist (2), or both (3) or neither (4).

18. Also, it is not expressed if the Glorious One exists (1) while remaining [in the world],Or
does not exist (2), or both (3) or neither (4).

19. There is nothing whatever which differentiates the existence-in-flux (samsara) from nirvana;And
there is nothing whatever which differentiates nirvana from existence-in-flux.

20. The extreme limit (koti) of nirvana is also the extreme limit of existence-in-flux;There
is not the slightest bit of difference between these two.

21. The views [regarding] whether that which is beyond death is limited by a beginning or an
end or some other alternativeDepend on a nirvana limited by a beginning (purvanta) and an
end (aparanta),

22. Since all dharmas are empty, what is finite? What is infinite?What is both finite and infinite?
What is neither finite nor infinite?

23. Is there anything which is this or something else, which is permanent or impermanent,Which
is both permanent and impermanent, or which is neither?

24. The cessation of accepting everything [as real] is a salutary (siva) cessation of phenomenal
development (prapanca);No dharma anywhere has been taught by the Buddha of anything.

