[Chapter] 26: An Analysis of the Twelve Components (dvadasanga) (the twelve spokes)1. “What
is hidden by ignorance (1)” (avidyanivrta) has caused the three kinds of conditioned things
(2) (samskara) to be made for rebirth —By those actions it [i.e., ” what is hidden by ignorance”]
goes forward.

2. Consciousness (3), presupposing that which is conditioned (samskara), enters on its course.When
consciousness is begun, the “name-and-form’- (namarupa) (4) is instilled.

3. When the “name-and-form” is instilled, the six domains of sense perceptions (5) (ayatana)
are produced.Having arrived at the six domains of sense perceptions, the process of perception
begins to function.

4. Consciousness begins to function presupposing the eye, the visual forms, and ability of mental
association—Presupposing “name-and-form.”

5. That which is the coincidence (6) (samnipata) of visual form, consciousness, and the eye:That
is sensual perception; and from perception, sensation (7) begins to function.

6. “Craving (8)” (trsna) [for existing things] is conditioned by sensation.Certainly [a person]
craves for the sake of sensation.The one who craves acquires the four-fold acquisition
(9) (upadana)[namely sexual pleasure, false views, ascetic morality and vows, and the doctrine
of self-existence].

7. When the acquisition exists, the acquirer begins to function (10) (i.e. existence, becoming).If
he were someone without acquisition, that being would be released, and would not exist.

8. That being is the five “groups of universal elements” (skandha). Because of a being, birth
(11) begins to function.Growing old, dying, sorrow (dukkha) (12), etc., grief and regrets,

9. Despair and agitation: all this results from birth;That “produced being” is a single mass
of sorrows (dukkha).

10. Thus the ignorant people construct the conditioned things (samskara); [that is] the source
for existence-in-flux.The one who constructs is ignorant; the wise person is not [one who
constructs] because he perceives true reality.

11. When ignorance ceases, the constructed phenomena do not come into existence.A person’s cessation
of ignorance proceeds on the basis of “becoming” [enlightened] through knowledge.

12. Through cessation of every [component] none functions;That single mass of sorrow (dukkha)
is thus completely destroyed.

